Quick review of abstract and Section 1 (#52)
cbor-wg/draft-ietf-cbor-serialization: draft-ietf-cbor-serialization.md

- name: Wolf McNally
  organization: Blockchain Commons
  email: wolf@wolfmcnally.com

> - name: Carsten Bormann

Reviewer: 👍

--- abstract

> This document defines two CBOR serialization constraints: "preferred-plus serialization" and "deterministic serialization."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document defines two CBOR serializations: "preferred-plus serialization" and "deterministic serialization."
```

It also introduces the term "general serialization" to name the full set of serialization options defined in RFC 8949.
Together, these three form a complete set of serialization constraints that cover the majority of CBOR serialization use cases.

> These serialization constraints are largely compatible with those widely implemented by the CBOR community.

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of using `serialization constraints` here.

> These serialization constraints are largely compatible with those widely implemented by the CBOR community.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These serializations are largely compatible with those widely implemented by the CBOR community.
```

Readers may wish to review this background information first.

CBOR intentionally allows multiple valid serializations of the same data item.
For example, the array [1, 2] can be serialized in more than one way,
two of which are shown in {{tab-array-ser}}:

| Type              | Description                                      | Bytes                |
|-------------------|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------|

> | Definite-length   | The array length (2) is encoded at the beginning | 0x82 0x01 0x02       |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Preferred encoding | The array length (2) is encoded and the shortest encoding of the integer is used | 0x82 0x01 0x02 |
| Definite-length | The array length (2) is encoded at the beginning | 0x82 0x019 0x00 0x01 0x18 0x02 |
```

| Indefinite-length | The array is terminated by the "break" stop code (0xff) | 0x9f  0x01 0x02 0xff |
{: #tab-array-ser title="[1, 2] in definite-length and indefinite-length serializations"}

Similar variation exists for all other CBOR data items (except simple values).

This variability is deliberate.
CBOR is designed to allow encodings to be selected according to the constraints and requirements of a particular environment.
The flexibility is a core design feature.
(CBOR is not unique in this regard; compare ASN.1's BER encoding rules.)

For example, indefinite-length serialization is suited for streaming large arrays, where the total number of elements to be serialized is not known in advance.

> Conversely, definite-length serialization works well to decode small arrays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, indefinite-length serialization is suited for streaming large arrays, where the total number of elements to be serialized is not known in advance, which is more likely to be the case in constrained environments.
Conversely, definite-length serialization works well to decode small arrays.
```

## Interoperability

The interoperability challenge arises because partial implementations are both permitted and expected.
For example, an encoder might transmit an indefinite-length array to a decoder that does not support indefinite-length encodings.
The decoder may not be a full CBOR implementation, but there is an incentive to support a partial implementation of the decoder if the application does not need indefinite-length encodings.

Decoders, in particular, frequently choose not to support all serialization forms.
This may be due to operation in constrained environments or because implementing a full general decoder including indefinite-length decoding can be significantly more work
(particularly in languages like C and Rust, which lack built-in support for dynamic arrays, maps, and strings).
This forces encoders to apply constraints to which of CBOR's serialization variants they choose; we may (sloppily) call such a set of serialization constraints "a serialization".

In practice, most CBOR usage occurs outside highly constrained environments.
This makes it both feasible and beneficial to define a common serialization suitable for general use.

> \[But not for highly constrained environments?  I'm sure many use cases in those can be included, too.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: The point of the paragraph is that there is large enough base of use cases to make preferred-plus highly worthwhile. I think it's important to minimize text for readability. The point of the paragraph is made without this detail.

Implementors in constrained environments will be able to figure out that they can use preferred-plus.

> Protocol specifications can reference such a serialization rather than restating detailed encoding rules, and library implementations can prioritize support for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Protocol specifications can reference such a serialization constraints, rather than restating them; library implementations could also prioritize support for these referenced serialization constraints.
```

> \[Can't fix this sentence, because it is mixing up the actual benefit of DLO with creating interoperability problems by enforcing preferred serialization.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This document defines that serialization: preferred-plus serialization.

## Determinism

> Some applications benefit from not having variation in serialization, by using exactly one serialization for each data item, i.e., a _deterministic_ serialization.

Reviewer: Many applications benefit from preferred plus for the same reasons. Using "a deterministic serialization" does not add anything an further confuses this. I propose we leave the original text.

```suggestion
The determinism challenge arises because there are multiple ways to serialize the same data item.
The example serialization of the array [1,2] above shows this.
This is a problem in some protocols that hash or sign encoded CBOR.
```

Author: The benefit from an "almost, but not always" deterministic encoding is unclear.
Experience would suggest that this leads to gray zones that both benefit an attacker and create interoperability problems.

Examples are protocols that hash or sign encoded CBOR.

> \[Add a reference to use cases for deterministic encoding.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Many approaches to deterministic serialization are possible, each optimized for different environmental constraints or application requirements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many approaches to deterministic serialization are possible, each optimized for different environmental constraints or application requirements.
However, as noted earlier, the majority of CBOR usage occurs outside constrained environments.
```

Reviewer: The original text was clear and quite useful.

It is therefore practical to define a single deterministic serialization suitable for general use.

Protocol specifications and library implementations can reference this serialization instead of defining their own deterministic encoding rules.

> This document defines that serialization: \[add qualifier] deterministic serialization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines that serialization: deterministic serialization.
```

## Relation to RFC 8949

This document independently restates the definition of serialization constraints rather than attempting to clarify those in {{-cbor}} (that need clarification).
This approach enables the serialization requirements to be expressed directly in normative {{RFC2119}} language, and to be consolidated in this single comprehensive specification.
This approach provides clarity and simplicity for implementers and the CBOR community over the long term.

> \[Please see draft-bormann-restatement for why the general approach of restatement is a bad idea, and how this can be mitigated.]

Reviewer: Referencing this draft does not help the community, and causes confusion

```suggestion
```

Author: Well, we aren't there yet where we might help the community with this draft.
Authors and reviewers should be aware of the implications of doing this, as work remains.
Converting to editor's note.

> The serializations defined herein are formally new, but we just hope they are largely interchangeable with the way the serializations described in {{-cbor}} are implemented.

Reviewer: The "we just hope" is unfounded. We did the work. We tested. We investigated. They work.

```suggestion
The serializations defined herein are formally new, but are largely interchangeable with the way the serializations described in {{-cbor}} are implemented.
```

Author: There is no strategy here to achieve this, just an aspirational statement.
Converting to editor note.

> For example, preferred serialization described in {{-cbor}} is commonly implemented, sometimes without support for indefinite-lengths.

Reviewer: More reflective of the data.

```suggestion
For example, preferred serialization described in {{-cbor}} is commonly implemented, often without support for indefinite-lengths.
```

Author: Please indicate what the terms "sometimes" and "often" mean for you.
The sentence is constructed in a way to imply that these two decisions (implement PS in the encoder, do not support indefinite length in the decoder) are somehow related; they are not.

Readers may wish to review this background information first.

CBOR intentionally allows multiple valid serializations of the same data item.

> For example, the array [1, 2] can be serialized in more than one way,
> three of which are shown in {{tab-array-ser}}:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the array [1, 2] can be serialized in more than one way:
```
there is no need to forward reference a table that immediately follows a colon.

Reviewer 2: this is harmless imo.

| Constraints                               | Description                                                                      | Bytes                         |
|-----------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| Preferred serialization, definite-length only | The array length (2) and the integer values are encoded in the shortest encoding | 0x82 0x01 0x02                |
| Definite-length only                          | The array length (2) is encoded at the beginning                                 | 0x82 0x19 0x00 0x01 0x18 0x02 |
| Preferred serialization                       | The array is terminated by the "break" stop code (0xff)                          | 0x9f 0x01 0x02 0xff           |

> {: #tab-array-ser title="[1, 2] in definite-length and indefinite-length serializations"}

Reviewer: I don't think the longer table is going to render well.

> Similar variation exists for all other CBOR data items (except simple values).

Reviewer: 👍

This variability is deliberate.
CBOR is designed to allow encodings to be selected according to the constraints and requirements of a particular environment.
The flexibility is a core design feature.

> (CBOR is not unique in this regard; compare ASN.1's BER encoding rules.)

Reviewer: I prefer the old wording.
```suggestion
(CBOR is not unique in this regard; BER and DER encoding for ASN.1 are a similar design choice.)
```

Reviewer 2: I like the new wording.

Conversely, definite-length serialization works well to decode small arrays.

As a result, CBOR encoders in libraries and protocol implementations commonly support only the serialization forms required for their intended use cases.
This behavior is expected and aligns with CBOR’s design goals.
CBOR decoders may choose to implement CBOR only partially (_partial implementations_); besides only implementing part of the CBOR generic data models a common footprint reduction for constrained environments is to leave out, e.g., support for decoding indefinite-length serialization (DLO, definite-length only).

However, both the flexibility offered by CBOR and the desire to enable partial implementations introduce two challenges: interoperability and determinism.

## Interoperability

The interoperability challenge arises because partial implementations are both permitted and expected.
For example, an encoder might transmit an indefinite-length array to a decoder that does not support indefinite-length encodings.

> The decoder may not be a full CBOR implementation, but there is an incentive to support a partial implementation of the decoder if the application does not need indefinite-length encodings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

i don't find this statement relevant.

Reviewer 2: This is relevant, web authn has a similar sentence about JSON parsers on constrained devices.

Decoders, in particular, frequently choose not to support all serialization forms.
This may be due to operation in constrained environments or because implementing a full general decoder including indefinite-length decoding can be significantly more work
(particularly in languages like C and Rust, which lack built-in support for dynamic arrays, maps, and strings).
This forces encoders to apply constraints to which of CBOR's serialization variants they choose; we may (sloppily) call such a set of serialization constraints "a serialization".

In practice, most CBOR usage occurs outside highly constrained environments.
This makes it both feasible and beneficial to define a common
serialization suitable for general use.
[^general-use]

[^general-use]: But not for highly constrained environments?  Many use
    cases in those can be included, too.  The shape of the exclusion
    of constrained environments this document argues for needs to be
    better understood.

> Protocol specifications can reference such a serialization constraints, rather than restating them; library implementations could also prioritize support for these referenced serialization constraints.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Protocol specifications can reference such a serialization, rather than restating them; library implementations could also prioritize support for these referenced serialization constraints.
```

## Determinism

Some applications benefit from not having variation in serialization, by using exactly one serialization for each data item, i.e., a _deterministic_ serialization.
Examples are protocols that hash or sign encoded CBOR.
[^ref-use-cases]

[^ref-use-cases]: Add a reference to use cases for deterministic encoding.

Many approaches to deterministic serialization are possible, each optimized for different environmental constraints or application requirements.
However, as noted earlier, the majority of CBOR usage occurs outside constrained environments.
It is therefore practical to define a single deterministic serialization suitable for general use.

Protocol specifications and library implementations can reference this serialization instead of defining their own deterministic encoding rules.

This document defines that serialization: [^add-qualifier] deterministic serialization.

[^add-qualifier]: The term deterministic serialization is generic (it
    is used this way in this section!).  We need a qualified term for the
    common deterministic serialization that we recommend for general use.

## Relation to RFC 8949

> This document independently restates the definition of serialization constraints rather than attempting to clarify those in {{-cbor}} (that need clarification).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This document independently restates the definition of serializations rather than attempting to clarify those in {{-cbor}} (that need clarification).
```
